Id : post_painterly_abstraction
Source Link : https://www.theartstory.org/movement/post-painterly-abstraction/
Dynamic Card Iframe Link : https://www.theartstory.org/data/content/dynamic_content/ai-card/movement/post-painterly-abstraction
Name : Post-Painterly Abstraction
Post-Painterly Abstraction developed in (year) : None
Post-Painterly Abstraction's Description : Post-painterly Abstraction is a broad term for a variety of styles that were a reaction to the painterly, gestural approaches of  Abstract Expressionists.
Post-Painterly Abstraction Content Publish Date: 1/22/2012

Quotes : "A picture is a flat surface with paint on it - nothing more.", "The form of my painting is the content.", "A really good picture looks as if it's happened at once. It's an immediate image.", "The representation I'm interested in is of those things only the eye can touch.", "Well, in the climate of 1957, '58, Abstract Expressionism and painterly abstraction were dominating everything. All the art departments - college art departments - were grinding out little de Koonings and Pollocks and Klines and so on. So, in that climate, it seemed like Abstract Expressionism was academic, and there was no place to go. It had already been used up. And you had to go somewhere. So the very opposite place to go, obviously, was to get away from painterliness and be neat. And I like to say that. There's no more profound reason than that, but that's the way I was thinking then. 'Let's see if I can't do something that goes in the opposite direction from painterly abstraction.' So I just set out on - more a lark, I think. I just decided to do a stripe painting, just to be outrageous. Of course, three years later, Clement Greenberg curated this very famous historic show called <i>Post-Painterly Abstraction</i>, which I fitted into like a glove and he included three of my works in it. I was just one of a number of people that were beginning to feel that this was used up, this painterly abstraction was used up and we had to move somewhere else.", "It certainly has nothing to do with doctrine, with geometrical form for its own sake. These artists prefer trued and faired edges simply because these call less attention to themselves as drawing - and by doing that they also get out of the way of color.", "Another thing the artists in this show, with two or three exceptions, have in common is the high keying, as well as lucidity, of their color. They have a tendency, many of them, to stress contrasts of pure hue rather than contrasts of light and dark. For the sake of these, as well as in the interests of optical clarity, they shun thick paint and tactile effects. Some of them dilute their paint to an extreme and soak it into unsized and unprimed canvas (following Pollock's lead in his black and white paintings of 1951). In their reaction against the "handwriting" and "gestures" of Painterly Abstraction, these artists also favor a relatively anonymous execution.", 

Synopsis : Post-painterly abstraction is a broad term that encompasses a variety of styles that evolved in reaction to the painterly, gestural approaches of some Abstract Expressionists. Coined by Clement Greenberg in 1964, it originally served as the title of an exhibition that included a large number of artists who were associated with various tendencies, including color field painting, hard-edge abstraction, and the Washington Color School.

Key Ideas : "Greenberg believed that, during the early 1950s, Abstract Expressionism (or, as he preferred to call it, "Painterly Abstraction") had degenerated into a weak school, and, in the hands of less talented painters, its innovations had become nothing but empty devices. But he also believed that many artists were advancing in some of Abstract Expressionism's more fruitful directions - principally those allied to color field painting - and these were yielding to a range of new tendencies that he described as "post-painterly."", "Greenberg characterized post-painterly abstraction as linear in design, bright in color, lacking in detail and incident, and open in composition (inclined to lead the eye beyond the limits of the canvas). Most importantly, however, it was anonymous in execution: this reflected the artists' desire to leave behind the grandiose drama and spirituality of Abstract Expressionism.", "Some critics, including Clement Greenberg and Barbara Rose, remarked on the decorative character of some post-painterly abstraction. In the past, Harold Rosenberg had described failed Abstract Expressionist paintings as "apocalyptic wallpaper," suggesting that decorative qualities were to be avoided. The new tendency suggested a change in attitudes.", 

Beginnings :

 : In 1964, critic Clement Greenberg was recruited by the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) to curate an exhibition devoted to young abstractionists. He was a natural choice to curate such a show, as by the late 1950s he had a prominent reputation as a defender of contemporary abstract art. Greenberg called the exhibition Post-Painterly Abstraction, although in the essay he wrote for the exhibition catalog he never actually referred to the style by name. Instead, he defined it by what it was not - "painterly abstraction," or the style of the Abstract Expressionists.Greenberg selected several East coast-based artists whose work he was already familiar with, such as Morris Louis and Helen Frankenthaler. As for the Bay Area artists, such as John Ferren and Sam Francis, debate continues as to who exactly selected them for the exhibition. While some credit James Elliott, a curator at the L.A. County Museum, the original exhibition catalog indicated that Greenberg was taken to see several works in California by Fred Martin of the San Francisco Art Association.There was a total of 31 artists selected for Post-Painterly Abstraction, and each of them was represented by three paintings apiece, most of which were made between 1960 and 1964. All of the artists were either natives of the USA or Canada.

Concepts, Styles, and Trends :

 : Greenberg borrowed from the Swiss art historian Heinrich Wölfflin in devising the term post-painterly abstraction. Wolfflin had popularized the term "painterly" to describe characteristics of the Baroque, which separated it from classical, or Renaissance art. Greenberg believed that abstract painting had evolved amidst a trend towards "painterly" painting, but had swung back towards cleaner composition and sharper forms in the 1920s and 1930s, under the influence of Mondrian, Synthetic Cubism, and the Bauhaus. Abstract Expressionism marked another swing towards the painterly, and the inevitable reaction against it was away from it once again - though Greenberg emphasized that post-painterly abstraction was not a return to the past.Although many artists associated with the tendency worked with clean lines and clearly defined forms (such as Frank Stella, Ellsworth Kelly, and Al Held), others explored softer forms. Helen Frankenthaler, for example, became well known for soaking paint into untreated canvas, which created a visual effect of color opening up the canvas. Rather than working up the paint into a rich texture on the surface of the canvas, as many artists of the previous generation had done, she allowed paint to seep into the canvas itself, creating a vibrant and utterly flat visual plane. Other post-painterly artists, such as Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, and Jules Olitski, picked up on Frankenthaler's soaking technique to create a variety of color field paintings of their own unique design.

Later Developments :

 : In June 1965, an exhibition took place at the Washington Gallery of Modern Art in Washington, D.C., called Washington Color Painters. Included in the show were many of the artists who had participated in Post-Painterly Abstraction in Los Angeles the previous year. They included Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, Howard Mehring, Gene Davis, and Thomas Downing. This exhibit marked the official beginning of what became known as the Washington Color School, which was in many respects a sub-movement of color field painting. The Washington painters created minimalist canvases composed of stripes, thin bands of alternating colors, and geometric shapes.In November of 1966, in the pages of Artforum, critic Michael Fried published the essay, "Shape as Form: Frank Stella's New Paintings." In it he referred to the recent works of Morris Louis, Kenneth Noland, and Jules Olitski - all in addition to Stella's work - as a "new illusionism." The importance of this, according to Fried, was the difference between literal and depicted shape. The old standard of abstract painting, or the "old illusionism," was for the artist to take a basic square or rectangular canvas support and use that template to depict whatever they pleased. What artists like Stella and Noland had achieved, according to Fried, was the complete transformation of paintings' literal form. By using oddly-shaped, oblong, and asymmetrical canvases, they had made the form of the painting and the shape of the canvas synonymous things. Therefore this "new illusionism" marked the advent of the shaped canvas, as a singularly modern invention.

Artwork : 

Title : Blue Balls VII

Artist : Sam Francis

Produced in the year : 1962

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : The work of Sam Francis contains many visual indicators reminiscent of the "action painting" or art informel schools of Abstract Expressionism. What made Francis a unique painter was his technique of tachisme, in which heavy blotches of free-flowing oil paints were allowed to drip down and, in the process, create an accidental design. In Blue Balls VII, which was included in the 1964 Post-Painterly Abstraction exhibit, Francis used far less paint than he was accustomed to. The end result showcases razor-thin lines of blue paint that cascade down from the more prominent blotches applied throughout the canvas.

Found in Collection : Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles

Title : Dance

Artist : John Ferren

Produced in the year : 1962

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : California native John Ferren (who was actually older than most of the first-generation AbEx artists) retained elements of what Greenberg called the "Tenth-Street touch." He described this as when "The stroke left by a loaded brush or knife frays out, when the stroke is long enough, into streaks, ripples, and specks of paint. These create variations of light and dark by means of which juxtaposed strokes can be graded into one another without abrupt contrasts." Greenberg criticized the "touch" as a safety net of sorts for those artists having trouble creating a unified image on an abstract plane. However, he praised Ferren's Dance and other similar works for applying the "Tenth-Street touch" and at the same time "boxing it within a large framing area" and managing "to get a new expressiveness from it."

Found in Collection : Katharina Rich Perlow Gallery, New York

Title : Red Blue

Artist : Ellsworth Kelly

Produced in the year : 1963

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : Kelly's Red Blue recalls in many ways Barnett Newman's signature "zip" paintings, with the single dividing line cutting through an otherwise unified field of color. What set Kelly's painting apart was the way in which he applied the pigment. Kelly allowed his diluted oil paints to soak into the canvas, rendering the surface a clean and utterly flat picture plane. His red divider is also much wider than Newman's "zips," and applied to create a cleaner, simpler hard-edged line. Another key characteristic of Kelly's hard-edge, Color Field paintings was his tendency to only use two opposing colors.

Found in Collection : Oklahoma City Museum of Art

Title : The Key

Artist : Howard Mehring

Produced in the year : 1963

Material Used : Magna on canvas

Description  : In Greenberg's essay for the Post-Painterly Abstraction catalog, he was careful to point out that the post-painterly artists were in fact rejecting the technique of action painting, but this rejection in no way constituted an attempt to return to neo-plasticism or synthetic Cubism. This assertion is difficult to believe upon looking at Mehring's The Key (which was part of the Post-Painterly exhibit), which visibly recalls Mondrian's geometric abstractions, at least in form if not in color. However, what set Mehring's painting apart was his use of perfect symmetry, both in depicted and literal shape (painterly form and canvas measurement, respectively), for which Mondrian was not known. In fact, all three of Mehring's paintings at the 1964 show measured 78"x78".

Found in Collection : Gary Snyder Project Space, New York

Title : Cycle

Artist : Kenneth Noland

Produced in the year : 1960

Material Used : Acrylic on canvas

Description  : One of Noland's signature series of paintings was the Target paintings, which for him also doubled as his own brand of Color Field Painting and geometric abstraction. In Cycle Noland created something particularly uncomplicated and, in fact, the near opposite of the Color Field style. Cycle's central target is entirely surrounded by bare canvas; a compositional decision also made by fellow painter Morris Louis. What Noland achieved with this painting was most likely what Greenberg had in mind when he wrote about the post-painterly rejection of the "doctrine" of Abstract Expressionism. By creating a strikingly simple geometric form and emphasizing more canvas than paint, Noland was definitely moving beyond the visual confines of freeform abstract painting.

Found in Collection : The Phillips Collection, Washington DC

Title : Isis Ardor

Artist : Jules Olitski

Produced in the year : 1962

Material Used : Acrylic on canvas

Description  : Greenberg wrote in the Post-Painterly catalog that many of the artists represented "have a tendency...to stress contrasts of pure hue rather than contrasts of light and dark...In their reaction against the 'handwriting' and the 'gestures' of Painterly Abstraction, these artists also favor a relatively anonymous execution." Olitski's Isis Ardor was one of the paintings included in the 1964 show and was certainly an ideal example of a painting that opposed flat planes of color. The contrasts Greenberg spoke of appear to be more of a visual tension in Olitski's painting. His three colors, interacting with small portions of bare canvas, sit so tenuously in the canvas that it almost appears as if they are struggling to resist one another, and with few exceptions they succeed.

Found in Collection : Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, Richmond, VA

Recommended Pages From the Art Story Page:


Amazon Links (Books) : 
Title : Modernism's Masculine Subjects: Matisse, the New York School, and Post-Painterly Abstraction
Amazon Link : https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0262524686?tag=tharst-20

Title : Colourfield Painting: Minimal, Cool, Hard Edge, Serial and Post-Painterly Abstract Art of the Sixties to the Present
Amazon Link : https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1861710267?tag=tharst-20

Title : Color as Field: American Painting, 1950-1975
Amazon Link : https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0300120230?tag=tharst-20

Title : The Shape of Color: Excursions in Color Field Art, 1950-2005
Amazon Link : https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1894243455?tag=tharst-20



Extra Links (Websites) : 
Title : Post-Painterly Abstraction
Link : http://www.sharecom.ca/greenberg/ppacover.html

Title : Color as Field: American Painting
Link : http://www.nytimes.com/slideshow/2008/03/06/arts/0307-COLO_index.html

Title : Guggenheim: Post-Painterly Abstraction
Link : http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-list/movement/?search=Post-painterly%20abstraction

Title : Birth of the Cool
Link : http://www.artltdmag.com/index.php?subaction=showfull&id=1193157556&archive=&start_from=&ucat=41

Title : The Washington Color School is Ready to Bloom
Link : http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/16/AR2007011601756.html

Title : Irreplaceable Hue - Color Field Painting
Link : http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m0268/is_n1_v33/ai_16107191/?tag=content;col1

Title : Post-Painterly Abstraction
Link : http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/07/arts/design/07fink.html?pagewanted=1&_r=3&adxnnl=1&adxnnlx=1332435778-XY1qOjtBHjCbkslZMlV/1A

Title : Corcoran Gallery of Art Recalls Influence of the Washington Color School
Link : http://www.pbs.org/newshour/art/corcoran-recalls-influence-of-washington-color-school/

