Id : boccioni_umberto
Source Link : https://www.theartstory.org/artist/boccioni-umberto/
Dynamic Card Iframe Link : https://www.theartstory.org/data/content/dynamic_content/ai-card/artist/boccioni-umberto
Name : Umberto Boccioni
Umberto Boccioni Years Worked : 1905 - 1916
Umberto Boccioni's Description : Boccioni developed Italian Futurist theories, and introduced the stylistic innovations that led to the group's dynamic style.
Umberto Boccioni's Art Description : Important art & artworks analysis by Umberto Boccioni including: Self-Portrait, The City Rises, The Street Enters the House, States of Mind I: The Farewells, Unique Forms of Continuity in Space, The Charge of the Lancers & more in Futurism & Cubism.
Umberto Boccioni's Nationality : Italian
Umberto Boccioni's Occupation : Painter, Sculptor, and Theoretician
Umberto Boccioni's BirthDate : October 19, 1882
Umberto Boccioni's BirthPlace : Reggio Calabria, Italy
Umberto Boccioni's DeathDate : August 17, 1916
Umberto Boccioni's DeathPlace : Sorte, Italy
Umberto Boccioni Content Publish Date: 11/22/2011

Quotes : "What we want to do is to show the living object in its dynamic growth", "Nothing is absolute in painting. What was truth for the painters of yesterday is but a falsehood today.", "To paint a human figure you must not paint it; you must render the whole of its surrounding atmosphere.", "Especially for us Italians, everything modern is synonymous with ugliness.. To a Venetian, Florentine, or Roman the modern movement is an aberration that must be fled from after first deriding or deploring it...  Its is precisely this constant, disgraceful antagonism between past and present that is responsible for our political, social, and artistic weakness.", "[War is] a wonderful, marvelous, terrible thing. And in the mountains it seems like a battle with the infinite. Grandiose, immense, life and death. I am Happy.", "I shall leave this existence with a contempt for all that is not art.", "The time has passed for our sensations in painting to be whispered. We wish them in the future to sing and re-echo upon our canvasses in deafening and triumphant flourishes.", "(to erect)… a new altar throbbing with dynamism as pure and exultant as those which were elevated to divine mystery through religious contemplation.", 

Synopsis : Umberto Boccioni was one of the most prominent and influential artists among the Italian Futurists, an art movement that emerged in the years before the First World War. Boccioni was important not only in developing the movement's theories, but also in introducing the visual innovations that led to the dynamic, Cubist-like style now so closely associated with the group. Emerging first as a painter, Boccioni later produced some significant Futurist sculpture. He died while volunteering in the Italian army, aged only thirty-three, making him emblematic of the Futurists' celebration of the machine and the violent destructive force of modernity.

Key Ideas : "Although Boccioni deserves a great amount of credit for evolving the style now associated with Italian Futurism, he first matured as a Neo-Impressionist painter, and was drawn to landscape and portrait subjects. It was not until he encountered Cubism that he developed a style that matched the ideology of dynamism and violent societal upheaval that lay at the heart of Futurism. Boccioni borrowed the geometric forms typical of the French style, and employed them to evoke crashing, startling sounds to accompany the depicted movement.", "Boccioni believed that scientific advances and the experience of modernity demanded that the artist abandon the tradition of depicting static, legible objects. The challenge, he believed, was to represent movement, the experience of flux, and the inter-penetration of objects. Boccioni summed up this project with the phrase, "physical transcendentalism."", "Despite his fascination with physical movement, Boccioni had a strong belief in the importance of intuition, an attitude he inherited from the writings of Henri Bergson and the Symbolist painters of the late-19th century. This shaped Boccioni's approach to depicting the modern world, encouraging him to give it symbolic, almost mythical dimensions that evoked the artist's emotions as much as the objective reality of modern life. In this respect, Boccioni's approach is very different from that of the Cubists, whose work was grounded in an attempt to closely describe the physical character of objects, albeit in a new way.", 

Biography :

Childhood : Umberto Boccioni was born in 1882 in Reggio Calabria, a rural region on the southern tip of Italy. His parents had originated from the Romagna region, further north. As a young boy, Boccioni and his family moved frequently, eventually settling in the Sicilian city of Catania in 1897, where he received the bulk of his secondary education. There is little evidence to suggest he had any serious interest in the fine arts until 1901, at which time he moved from Catania to Rome and enrolled at the Accademia di Belle Arti di Roma (Academy of Fine Arts, Rome).

Early Training : It was in Rome that Boccioni first connected with his future Futurist collaborator Gino Severini. Both studied under Giacomo Balla, who was renowned as a Divisionist painter, and Boccioni became a loyal student of the style. During these years he also continued his travels in Italy and beyond; he visited Paris for an extended period, where he encountered Impressionism for the first time, and followed this with a sojourn to Russia.During this period, much of the art being produced in Italy was, to Boccioni's mind, rather provincial. In the city of Milan, however, there existed a forward-thinking society of young artists known as the Famiglia Artistica. So, in 1907, Boccioni moved to Milan, where he met Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, the Symbolist poet and theorist. Two years later, on February 20, 1909, Marinetti published the first Futurist manifesto on the front page of the established French newspaper Le Figaro. It quickly attracted followers, among them Boccioni, Severini, Balla, Carlo Carra and Luigi Russolo. But in the years that followed, Boccioni proved to be Futurism's most outspoken proponent and foremost theorist, not to mention primarily responsible for applying Marinetti's example to the visual arts.

Mature Period : The beginning of Futurism coincided with Boccioni's most prolific period as an artist. On February 11, 1910, under the leadership of Boccioni, the "Manifesto of Futurist Painters" was published by Marinetti's magazine Poesia, and was signed by Severini, Balla and others. Addressed to the "Young Artists of Italy," this new manifesto, much like its predecessor, attacked institutions like museums and libraries, which the Futurists now considered redundant. Boccioni and the Futurists were aiming at one of the Italy's principle claims to prestige, its classical past, which they considered a hindrance to the country's development as a modern power.Later on in the same year Boccioni published the "Technical Manifesto of Futurist Painting," also through Marinetti's Poesia. He declared "That all subjects previously used must be swept aside in order to express our whirling life of steel, of pride, of fever and of speed."As a young artist, Boccioni had chosen subjects that simply caught his eye, but as a Futurist, he selected subjects as vehicles for painterly theories. One subject that often inspired him was the city, and it is explored in works like The Forces of the Street and The Street Enters the House (both 1911).In 1912, the Futurist group held an impressive exhibition of paintings at the Bernheim-Jeune in Paris. The centerpiece of Boccioni's contribution was a group of three paintings entitled States of Mind I-III: The Farewells, Those Who Stay, and Those Who Go (all 1911), considered by many to be the artist's most ambitious work thus far. In States of Mind, he attempted to abandon the dependence on any descriptive reality, opting instead to, as he put it, "[have the] colors and forms ... express themselves." In short, Boccioni designed these works to express the Futurist mind-set, in which the past had no bearing on how the artist viewed the world around him.While in Paris, Boccioni visited various artists' studios, including those of Braque, Brâncuși, Archipenko and Duchamp-Villon. What he saw encouraged him to apply his principles to sculpture, resulting in works like The Development of a Bottle in Space (1912) and Unique Forms of Continuity in Space (1913). This new interest also led him to write the "Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture."

Late Period and Death : In 1913, Boccioni began contributing to the experimental newspaper Lacerba, which had been founded by the Florentine author and Futurist Giovanni Papini (Lacerba published 70 issues between January 1, 1913 and May 22, 1915). With this newspaper, Boccioni and others now had a publication exclusively devoted to promoting the movement's ideas. In April of the following year, Boccioni published his book Futurist Painting and Sculpture, by far the most comprehensive account of Futurist artistic theory written by a founding member.In 1914, the Great War began and quickly spread throughout Europe, and its remarkable ferocity very closely resembled the cleansing violence that the Futurists had long called for. So, in July 1915, Boccioni, along with Marinetti, Russolo and several other Futurists, enrolled with the Lombard Volunteer Cyclist Battalion.The battalion was disbanded in December later that year and during a leave of absence from the war, Boccioni continued to paint, write and lecture. He was called back into service in June 1916, and stationed outside Verona with an artillery brigade. During a training exercise, Boccioni was thrown from his horse and trampled. Still a young man of just thirty-three, Boccioni succumbed to injuries and died a day later on August 17.

Legacy : Although the Futurist movement is most associated with its founder, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, its artistic direction owes much to Umberto Boccioni.  He is responsible for producing the seminal texts on Futurist art, and was by and large the movement's most talented, technically proficient, and best educated artist. Despite the brevity of his career, he became a prolific student of avant-garde styles, while simultaneously striving to create something entirely novel: an art that uniquely expressed the speed, dynamism and tragedy of modern-day life.

Artwork : 

Title : Self-Portrait

Produced in the year : 1905

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : This Self-Portrait demonstrates
      Boccioni's style as a student at the Academy in Rome.
      Although it differs greatly from his mature Futurism, being
      far softer in its tone and brushwork, he cherished the
      picture and never sold it during his lifetime. It is typical
      of the period when he was moving from a style inspired by
      early Impressionism to a more volumetric approach suggested
      by study of works by Paul C&#233;zanne.

Found in Collection : The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York

Title : The City Rises

Produced in the year : 1910

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : The City Rises is considered by many
      to be the very first truly Futurist painting. Boccioni took a
      year to complete it and it was exhibited throughout Europe
      shortly after it was finished. It testifies to the hold that
      Neo-Impressionism and Symbolism maintained on the movement's
      artists even after Futurism was inaugurated in 1909. It was
      not until around 1911 that Boccioni adapted elements of
      Cubism to create a distinct Futurist style. Nevertheless,
      The City Rises does capture the group's
      love of dynamism and their fondness for the modern city. A
      large horse races into the foreground while several workers
      struggle to gain control of it, suggesting a primeval
      conflict between humanity and beasts. The horse and figures
      are blurred, communicating rapid movement while other
      elements, such as the buildings in the background, are
      rendered more realistically. At the same time, the
      perspective teeters dramatically in different sections of the
      painting.

Found in Collection : The Museum of Modern Art, New York

Title : The Street Enters the House

Produced in the year : 1911

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : The geometric elements and the perspectival distortion
      in The The Street Enters the House
      demonstrate the influence of Expressionism and Cubism on
      Boccioni. According to the original catalog entry for the
      work, "The dominating sensation is that which one would
      experience on opening a window: all life, and the noises of
      the street rush in at the same time as the movement and the
      reality of the objects outside."

Found in Collection : Sprengel Museum, Hanover, Germany

Title : States of Mind I: The Farewells

Produced in the year : 1911

Material Used : Oil on canvas

Description  : The Farewells was the first of
      Boccioni's three-part series, States of
      Mind, which has long been seen as one of the high
      points of the Futurist style in painting. The focal point of
      the picture is provided by movement itself - the locomotive,
      the airplane, the automobile: modern machines that gave new
      meaning to the word "speed." In this work, set in a train
      station, Boccioni captures the dynamism of movement and
      chaos, depicting people being consumed by, or fused with, the
      steam from the locomotive as it whizzes past.

Found in Collection : The Museum of Modern Art, New York

Title : Unique Forms of Continuity in Space

Produced in the year : 1913

Material Used : Bronze

Description  : Although Boccioni was a painter first and foremost, his
      brief forays into sculpture are significant. The speed and
      fluidity of movement - what Boccioni called "a synthetic
      continuity" - is brilliantly captured in this bronze piece,
      with the human figure gliding through space, almost as if man
      himself is becoming machine, moving head-on into forceful
      winds. Possibly in homage to Auguste Rodin's Walking
      Man (1877-8), and the famous Greek statue
      Nike of Samothrace (220-190 B.C.), Boccioni left the sculpture without arms.

Found in Collection : The Museum of Modern Art, New York

Title : The Charge of the Lancers

Produced in the year : 1915

Material Used : Tempera and collage on pasteboard

Description  : The Charge of the Lancers is the
      only known work by Boccioni that is devoted exclusively to
      the theme of war. Being a collage, Charge
      was also a rare departure for the artist in terms of medium.
      In previous works, Boccioni had used the figure of the horse
      as a symbol for work, but in this collage the horse becomes a
      symbol of war and natural strength, since it appears to be
      overcoming a horde of German bayonets. If, in fact, Boccioni
      was establishing the brute strength of the horse over
      man-made weapons, it would suggest a slight departure from
      the Futurist principles of Marinetti. This work also eerily
      prefigures Boccioni's own death from having been trampled by
      a horse.

Found in Collection : Ricardo and Magda Jucker Collection,
      Milan

Recommended Books:



Extra Links (Websites) : 
Title : Umberto Boccioni: <br> Estorick Collection,
          London
Link : 
          http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/jan/27/visual-art-review

Title : Impossible Dreams of a Speed Freak
Link : 
          http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/jan/18/unique-forms-umberto-boccioni

Title : Art Review; Blurring the Line Between the Present
          and the Future
Link : 
          http://www.nytimes.com/2004/02/13/arts/art-review-blurring-the-line-between-the-present-and-the-future.html?src=pm

Title : ART; Futuristic Works That Define Dimensions of
          Time and Space
Link : 
          http://www.nytimes.com/1999/09/26/nyregion/art-futuristic-works-that-define-dimensions-of-time-and-space.html?src=pm

Title : Art in Review
Link : 
          http://www.nytimes.com/1993/04/09/arts/art-in-review-122193.html?src=pm

