Id : sherman_cindy
Source Link : https://www.theartstory.org/artist/sherman-cindy/
Dynamic Card Iframe Link : https://www.theartstory.org/data/content/dynamic_content/ai-card/artist/sherman-cindy
Name : Cindy Sherman
Cindy Sherman Years Worked : 1975 - Present
Cindy Sherman's Description : Sherman in her socially critical photography turned the camera on herself creating scenes of fashion, advertising, and girl-next-door roles.
Cindy Sherman's Nationality : American
Cindy Sherman's Occupation : Photographer
Cindy Sherman's BirthDate : January 19, 1954
Cindy Sherman's BirthPlace : Glen Ridge, New Jersey
Cindy Sherman Content Publish Date: 12/1/2010

Quotes : "The still must tease with the promise of a story the viewer of it itches to be told.", "I didn't want to make 'high' art, I had no interest in using paint, I wanted to find something that anyone could relate to without knowing about contemporary art. I wasn't thinking in terms of precious prints or archival quality; I didn't want the work to seem like a commodity.", "The work is what it is and hopefully it's seen as feminist work, or feminist-advised work, but I'm not going to go around espousing theoretical bullshit about feminist stuff.", "We're all products of what we want to project to the world. Even people who don't spend any time, or think they don't, on preparing themselves for the world out there - I think that ultimately they have for their whole lives groomed themselves to be a certain way, to present a face to the world.", "I feel I'm anonymous in my work. When I look at the pictures, I never see myself; they aren't self-portraits. Sometimes I disappear.", "Everyone thinks these are self-portraits but they aren't meant to be. I just use myself as a model because I know I can push myself to extremes, make each shot as ugly or goofy or silly as possible.", "I am always surprised at all the things people read into my photos, but it also amuse me. That may be because I have nothing specific in mind when I'm working. My intentions are neither feminist nor political. I try to put double or multiple meanings into my photos, which might give rise to a greater variety of interpretations.", "I didn't think of what I was doing as political. To me it was a way to make the best out of what I liked to do privately, which was to dress up.", "The way I see it, as soon as I make a piece I've lost control of it.", "One reason I was interested in photography was to get away from the preciousness of the art object.", 

Synopsis : Cindy Sherman is a contemporary master of socially critical photography. She is a key figure of the "Pictures Generation," a loose circle of American artists who came to artistic maturity and critical recognition during the early 1980s, a period notable for the rapid and widespread proliferation of mass media imagery. At first painting in a super-realist style in art school during the aftermath of American Feminism, Sherman turned to photography toward the end of the 1970s in order to explore a wide range of common female social roles, or personas. Sherman sought to call into question the seductive and often oppressive influence of mass-media over our individual and collective identities. Turning the camera on herself in a game of extended role-playing of fantasy Hollywood, fashion, mass advertising, and "girl-next-door" roles and poses, Sherman ultimately called her audience's attention to the powerful machinery and make-up that lay behind the countless images circulating in an incessantly public, "plugged in" culture. Sexual desire and domination, the fashioning of self-identity as mass deception, these are among the unsettling subjects lying behind Sherman's extensive series of self-portraiture in various guises. Sherman's work is central in the era of intense consumerism and image proliferation at the close of the 20th century.

Key Ideas : "Recalling a long tradition of self-portraiture and theatrical role-playing in art, Sherman utilizes the camera and the various tools of the everyday cinema, such as makeup, costumes, and stage scenery, to recreate common illusions, or iconic "snapshots," that signify various concepts of public celebrity, self-confidence, sexual adventure, entertainment, and other socially sanctioned, existential conditions. As though they constituted only a first premise, however, these images promptly begin to unravel in various ways that suggest how self-identity is often an unstable compromise between social dictates and personal intention.", "Sherman's photographic portraiture is both intensely grounded in the present while it extends long traditions in art that force the audience to reconsider common stereotypes and cultural assumptions, among the latter political satire, caricature, the graphic novel, pulp fiction, stand-up comedy (some of her characters are indeed uncomfortably "funny"), and other socially critical disciplines.", "Sherman's many variations on the methods of self-portraiture share a single, notable feature: in the vast majority of her portraits she directly confronts the viewer's gaze, no less in the case of posed sex dolls, as though to suggest that an underlying penchant for deception is perhaps the only "value" that truly unites us.", "Long assumed to be a medium that "mirrors" reality with precision, photography in Sherman's hands simultaneously constructs and critiques its apparent subject. In this sense, Sherman's unique form of portrait photography functions, in part, as a sign for the subjective nature of all human intelligence and the unstable nature of visual perception.", 

Biography :

Childhood : Cindy Sherman was born January 19, 1954 in Glen Ridge, New Jersey (virtually a suburb of New York City). Shortly after Cindy's birth, the family moved to Huntington, Long Island, where Cindy grew up as the youngest of five children. Although her parents shared a general disinterest in the arts-her father was an engineer and her mother a reading teacher-Sherman chose to study art in college, enrolling at the State University of New York, at Buffalo, in the early 1970s.

Early Training : Sherman studied in Buffalo from 1972-76; she began as a painter, but she quickly found herself frustrated by what she considered certain limitations of the medium. The 1970s was an eclectic era for painters working in the aftermath of Minimalism, and feeling as though "there was nothing more to say [through painting]," Sherman shifted her attention to photography. Although initially failing a required photography class, she later elected to repeat the course, which ignited her passion for the subject. During her studies, Sherman met fellow artists Robert Longo and Charles Clough, with whom she co-founded Hallwalls Center for Contemporary Art in 1974 (it continues to function to the present day as a dynamic, multi-arts "hub"). Longo and Sherman dated until 1979. During her studies, Sherman was exposed to Conceptual art and other progressive art movements and media under the widely influential art instructor, Barbara Jo Revelle.Upon graduation, Sherman moved to New York City to pursue her artistic career. In 1977, with her downtown residential and studio loft as her primary backdrop, Sherman began taking a series of photographs of herself, a project she would eventually refer to as the Untitled Film Stills. In this series, Sherman embodies the character of "Everywoman." Re-fashioning herself repeatedly into the guise of various female archetypes, Sherman played the girly pin-up, the film noir siren, the housewife, the prostitute, and the noble damsel in distress. The black-and-white series occupied her for about three years, so that by 1980 Sherman had virtually exhausted a myriad of seemingly timeless cliches referring to the "feminine."

Mature Period : With the debut of Untitled Film Stills, Sherman secured her position in the New York art world, leading to her first solo show at the non-profit exhibition space, The Kitchen. Shortly after, she was commissioned to create a centerfold image for Artforum magazine. Photos of a pink-robe-clad Sherman were ultimately deemed too racy by editor Ingrid Sischy and rejected. There is no knowing whether a subsequent series shot from 1985 to 1989, Disasters and Fairy Tales, was in some sense a response to that act of rejection, but, notably, it is a much darker endeavor than its prettified predecessor. Its gloomy palette and scenes strewn with vomit and mold challenged viewers to find beauty in the ugly and the unqualified grotesque.Sherman's next series took on the hallowed subject of the art tableau. History Portraits again presented Sherman-as-model, but this time she assumed the air of European art history's most famous "leading ladies." Living in Europe at the time of its creation, Sherman drew inspiration from the West's great museums. That interlude gave way, in 1992, to Sherman's Sex Pictures, a project taken up in response to the censorship of the art of Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano. In the Sex Pictures, Sherman substituted her own figure for that of a doll. Intending to shock and scandalize the public, the images present close-ups of doll-on-doll sex scenes and prosthetic genitalia. Shortly after she began work on this series, Sherman received a MacArthur Fellowship.In 1997, Sherman crossed over from still art photography to motion pictures, aided in part by her husband at that time, film director Michel Auder (the two divorced in 1999). She made her directorial debut with the thriller, Office Killer, starring Molly Ringwald and Jeanne Tripplehorn. A year later, Sherman played herself in John Waters's 1998 comedy, Pecker.Over the last decade, Sherman dons clown's make-up in a series of still photography (2003) and, even more recently, she explored carefully staged female "suburban" identities in a solo show at Metro Pictures, NY (2008). In the latter series, Sherman photographed herself in various states of awkward make-up, superimposing stodgy, highly self-conscious portraits over contrived domestic and faux-monumental backdrops. In 2006, Sherman was honored by a retrospective of her work at the Jeu de Paume Museum, in Paris. Sherman continues to live and work in New York City, where she is dating David Byrne, of the band, "Talking Heads." She celebrated a solo exhibition at MoMA in early 2012.

Legacy : The ultimate participant-critic of mass consumer culture, one perpetually partaking of its daily realities while nonetheless challenging its underlying assumptions, Cindy Sherman epitomizes the 1980s technique of "image-scavengering," and "appropriation" by artists seeking to question the so-called truth potential of mass imagery and its seductive hold on our individual and collective psyches. Sherman's depersonalized approach to portrait photography, in particular, has suggested a new, socially critical capacity for a medium that was once presumed a tool of documentary realism (or aesthetic pleasure). This "readymade" quality of the critically applied photograph, whereby a preexisting image or convention is appropriated intact by the artist and subtly turned into something more conceptually problematic, if not psychologically disturbing, has come to characterize much work of a new generation defying easy categorization.In addition, Sherman's work has been specifically cited as opening onto a new, "expanded field" of photography since the late 1990s, in much work characterized by a "fusion of narrative and stasis," such as in the photography of Jeff Wall, Anna Gaskell, Justine Kurland, Jenny Gage, and Sharon Lockhart. Such artists extend Sherman's anti-narrative approach to the medium and its subject matter, in work that frequently suggests unresolved stories and scenarios wrenched from contexts both common and disturbingly mysterious.

Cindy Sherman's Female Archetypes :

 : At its most basic definition an archetype is a communally accepted and widely recognized "typical" example of a person or thing that dwells within our universal consciousness. This example then becomes a recurrent symbol in our popular culture stemming from our shared mental landscape. In Jungian regard (Carl Jung), archetypes are informed and created by our common need to organize and define ourselves as human beings. This same need motivates many artists so it's no surprise that the exploration of life via the use of archetypes can be seen time again throughout the course of art history.For Sherman, this has meant delving into common tropes of being female, and what it means to present the self as something that desires to be seen.

Archetypes in Art History :

The Damsel in Distress : Rembrandt's famous painting depicts a classic example of the damsel in distress, also known as a woman who is placed in a perilous situation awaiting someone to swoop in and rescue her. His focus is on Andromeda from the story Metamorphoses. In mythology, she was the daughter of an Ethiopian king and queen, whose mother was prone to boasting about her daughter's beauty, so much so that the God Neptune punished Andromeda by having her chained to rocks by the ocean and sent a sea monster to torture her. Perseus, the story's hero, discovered the young beauty and made a deal with her parents that he would rescue her if he could be granted her hand in marriage.Untitled Film Still #48 by Cindy Sherman, 1979In Sherman's version, we see a lone woman, vulnerable on the side of the road, standing with her suitcase and without a ride, waiting for someone to drive by and assist her. The tones of the photograph are ominous as dark clouds cover a murky sky. Will someone cruise by to save this innocent, white-bloused woman with the unpredictable fate?

The Housewife : Beverly Hills Housewife, 1967 by David HockneyAs part of his California Dreaming series, David Hockney painted this portrait of a Beverly Hills housewife strolling through the outdoor patio of her luxury home. The housewife was a common subject throughout the 1960s and '70s as feminism rose to challenge the stereotypes of women whose lives and livelihoods stemmed from their roles within the home. Many narratives were dissected and explored around this archetype, both demeaning and elevating the status of women rooted in domesticity.Untitled Film Still #3Sherman's representation brings to mind a decidedly 1950s-era, married woman who stayed at home all day with nothing to do but clean the house and prepare for the return of her children from school and husband from work. This lonely housewife was oftentimes notably bored, relying on the seduction of the postman, or "mommy's little helper" pills to brighten her day.

The Ingénue : Renoir's painting plainly presents a portrait of an Ingénue, the term used to describe a youthful, innocent, beautiful, and sometimes naive girl who is admired for those traits alone, oftentimes treated like a muse-type character in books, films, and other cultural offerings. We rarely see past the exterior of this girl and her enthusiasm for being placed in this role also pigeonholes her within it. She often appears as the understudy in a play, or trying to capitalize on her talents and appeal while still young of age.Untitled Film Still #15 by Cindy Sherman, 1978Sherman's rendition of a sweet young dancer sitting in reflection mid-rehearsal brings to mind all the bright, young girls who travel to the big city with a pocketful of dreams and stars in their eyes, only to be fed into, and spit out of, the constantly revolving doors of the entertainment machine.

The Sex Object : The Doll, 1936 by Hans BellmerIn the 1930s, the Surrealist Hans Bellmer made a series of disquieting sculptures partly inspired by Jacques Offenbach's opera The Tales of Hoffman in which the main character falls in love with a realistic mechanical doll. Hoffman's dolls were constructed of wood, plaster, metal rods, nuts, and bolts, and eerily portrayed the fetishized eroticization of females and their body parts as mere sexual play objects.Cindy Sherman, Untitled #264Over fifty years later, Sherman's delve into the Sex Object archetype conjures a woman whose sole purpose is to serve a man sexually, seen in our contemporary society as an object to be used for sensual gratification above all else. The prostitute, the sex doll, the centerfold, and other ladies of the night, nameless and faceless beyond the utilization of their body parts, which temporarily memorialize her.

The Clown : Self Portrait as Clown, 1921 by Max BeckmannMax Beckman was interested in the world of entertainment and all of the colorful characters found within its milieus: the theater, the circus, and the music halls. In his view, the stage provided a metaphorical setting to explore human relationships and world affairs. One of his most famous paintings is this self-portrait as a clown, a picture that strikes a resonant chord in its allusion to the artist as another form of consummate performer.Cindy Sherman Untitled #414The Clown archetype goes beyond the normal female fodder for Sherman and arrives later in her career, emphasizing her role as the ultimate artistic entertainer. With roots in the court jester, this character's existence is marked by the ability to act for an audience's pleasure, with little regard toward her own. It is no surprise that many in the public eye, from artists to actors to politicians, can relate to this archetype.

The Society Woman : Lavinia Fontana was a noted painter commissioned by many women of her time to create portraits. It was fashionable in her day for women to seek these vanity paintings to depict momentous occasions in their lives or merely position themselves as ladies of certain social status and acclaim. This painting is a famous example of a marriage portrait. The objects, colors, and imagery depicted are all typical of a highborn bride'strousseau.Untitled #476Today, the Society Woman still looms large although pictorial evidence is most often found in the social pages of magazines. Sherman's contribution represents the woman for whom status, social class, and reputation is everything. These modern noblewomen maintain strenuous efforts to appear poised, affluent, and confident at all times despite any underlying hints at their more fragile, vulnerable, or insecure elements of humanity. Often blessed with money, through inheritance or marriage, they are still often commissioners of the vanity portrait to memorialize their lives of privileged position.

Artwork : 

Title : Untitled Film Still #13

Produced in the year : 1978

Material Used : Black and White photograph

Description  : 
Untitled Film Still #13 issues from Sherman's epic "Untitled Film Still" series (they did not actually derive from a larger movie) of the late 1970s, by which she first made a widespread reputation for herself as a witty commentator on the female role models of her youth, as well as those of an earlier generation. In this example, Sherman employs her own image as to suggest the central character in a 1960s "coming of age" romance, the young female intellectual on the verge of discovering her "true womanhood," or the prototypical virgin. Maturing in the 1970s in the midst of the American Womens' Movement, later known as the rise of Feminism, Sherman and her generation learned to see through mass media cliches and appropriate them in a satirical and ironic manner that made viewers self conscious about how artificial and highly constructed "female portraiture" could prove on close inspection.

Some critics criticize Sherman's Film Stills for catering to the male gaze and perpetuating the objectification of women. Others, understand Sherman's approach as critically-ironic parody of female stereotypes. Others still, assert that both cases are simultaneously true, with Sherman knowingly taking on stereotypical female roles in order to question their pervasiveness. At the same time her adoption of these roles inevitably leads her to be objectified further. 

Visual culture theorist Jui-Ch'i Liu asserts that many of these critiques focus on male spectatorship, whereas a reading of the images from the perspective of female viewers indicates the possibility of negotiating their own "desire and identification in relation to these images". Sherman has also implied that the works were created primarily for a female viewership, stating that "Even though I've never actively thought of my work as feminist or as a political statement, certainly everything in it was drawn from my observations as a woman in this culture. [...] That's certainly something I don't think men would relate to".	 


Found in Collection : The Museum of Modern Art, New York

Title : Untitled Film Still #21

Produced in the year : 1978

Material Used : Black and White photograph

Description  : When the Museum of Modern Art announced in 1996 that it had just acquired Sherman's complete Untitled Film Still series, the curators knew they had laid claim to one of the most representative works of the early 1980s American movement of "appropriation," and "simulationism." Both terms refer to American artists' mimicking, in the first half of the 1980s, former art masterpieces or widely circulating images in the mass media, and critically reworking them to arouse a sense of unease in the viewer, indeed often suggesting that culture had become largely a game of theatrical posing and egoistic pretense. As Peter Galassi, then-curator of photography stated, "Sherman's singular talent and sensibility crystallized broadly held concerns in the culture as a whole, about the role of mass media in our lives, and about the ways in which we shape our personal identities. Here, Sherman takes on the role of the small-town girl just happening upon the Big City. She is, typically, at first suspicious of the metropolitan lights and shadows, only to be eventually seduced by its undeniable attractions.

Found in Collection : The Museum of Modern Art, New York

Title : Untitled #92, "Disasters and Fairy Tales" Series

Produced in the year : 1985

Material Used : Color photograph

Description  : Part of the later Disasters and Fairy Tales series, this photo shows Sherman as a damsel in distress. Crouched on the ground, she fearfully looks away from the camera. With wetted hair and a tensed position, she appears as if she just walked off the set of a horror film. Sparse lighting centers the composition and lends an ominous tone to the entire photograph. Sherman successfully evokes one of the oldest, quasi-racist "cheap tricks" in the movie business, the setting up of a vulnerable female or private school girl (note the prototypical uniform of starched white shirt and plaid skirt) being preyed upon by some terrible, evil monster. The role goes back to Faye Ray's "scream queen" in King Kong, Judy Garland's Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz, and countless other popular culture favorites in everyday comic book series, graphic novels, Broadway musicals, and others media of the mid-20th century. By freezing the image into a kind of sorry, secular icon, Sherman demonstrates how art may act as a visual "truth serum," a force of social change by way of its ability to stop a viewer in his/her tracks and suggest how certain assumptions are culturally inherited, not necessarily "natural."

Found in Collection : Metro Pictures

Title : Untitled #209, "History Portrait" Series

Produced in the year : 1989

Material Used : Color photograph

Description  : In this three-quarter length, Italian Renaissance-style portrait, Sherman takes on the persona of the Mona Lisa. Donning a 15th-century Italianate dress, Sherman allies herself with one of art history's most famous, iconic paintings. No true replica, the photo is meant to call to mind the original, without literally copying it, the mental distance between the real and the imitation just barely apparent, yet somehow haunting. One might say that Sherman suggests that viewers rethink their familiarity with the original and question how its conventions of depiction continue to condition the way that even we, hundreds of years later, regard every representation of the "Female."

Found in Collection : The Estate of Jean-Michel Basquiat

Title : Untitled #264

Produced in the year : 1992

Material Used : Chromogenic color print

Description  : Intended by the artist to shock the unsuspecting viewer, the Sex Pictures series features anatomical dolls arranged in compromising positions. Set clearly apart from actual pornography, the photograph cruelly comments on the greater dehumanization of women in life, as well as in art since time immemorial. Her space is claustrophobic, the body little more than a tool of raw desire, while the accoutrements of "beauty," such as hairbrush, skimpy panties, and the like, are strewn haphazardly around her. Once again, Sherman extracts certain conventions from their usual contexts, where they are often obscured by a host of attendant desires, and baldly reframes them as objects of intense, analytical attention. The effect is something that neither a medical investigation nor a political speech could convey with such vivid precision. Sherman suddenly "makes strange" the everyday, or the familiar, in ways that suggest we often trod through our lives while sleepwalking.

Found in Collection : None

Title : Untitled

Produced in the year : 2004

Material Used : Color photograph

Description  : Sherman poses as a sad, or pathetic clown for some of her more recent works. Wearing elaborate make-up and fanciful costumes, she positions herself in front of digitally manipulated backgrounds, against which she explores the extremes of the clown character - its intense, yet superficial humor, its implied sadness, and its potential, subliminal rage. Set up much like a glamour shot, this photo focuses on the clown's face as the strange character stares stoically at the audience. The viewer is almost challenged, by the multiplied aspects of gross exaggeration in color, body type, expression, and circumstance, to make sense of the farcical image. The rather direct focus of the clown's eyes suddenly prods us to ask ourselves why we find such a figure humorous, and if the reasons behind our common laughter may in fact be traced to a cruel truth of human behavior normally left unquestioned in everyday reality.

Found in Collection : Metro Pictures

Title : Untitled

Produced in the year : 2008

Material Used : Color photograph

Description  : In one of her most recent untitled series, Sherman explores the role of the suburban American housewife, or middle-American "everywoman," a character at once sympathetic, pathetic, and often too close to recognition for comfort. Juxtaposing female types trying desperately to look "cultured," yet failing miserably to cross the social divide between so-called "good breeding" and mere awkward "social climbing," Sherman's cast of characters once again give rise to feelings of unease and painful self-recognition. Never fully defining where she stands in relation to such images, Sherman leaves interpretation open to the individual viewer, something that ultimately says more about the person reading these images than the subjects portrayed in their glossy, mirror-like surfaces.

Found in Collection : Metro Pictures

Recommended Books:



Extra Links (Websites) : 
Title : Cindy Sherman - Biography & Art - The Art History Archive
Link : http://www.arthistoryarchive.com/arthistory/photography/Cindy-Sherman.html

Title : The Ever-Shifting Selves Of Cindy Sherman, Girlish Vamp to Clown
Link : http://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/28/arts/art-review-the-ever-shifting-selves-of-cindy-sherman-girlish-vamp-to-clown.html?ref=cindysherman

Title : For the Love of Art
Link : http://movies.nytimes.com/2009/03/27/movies/27sher.html?ref=cindysherman

Title : Cindy Sherman
Link : http://www.jca-online.com/sherman.html

Title : Her Secret Identities - $
Link : http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2000/05/15/2000_05_15_074_TNY_LIBRY_000020839

Title : The Standpoint of Art⁄Criticism: Cindy Sherman as Feminist Artist?
Link : https://www.academia.edu/4463088/The_Standpoint_of_Art_Criticism_Cindy_Sherman_asHow_Do_They_Organize_and_Interpret_Phenomena

Title : Cindy Sherman: 'I enjoy doing the really difficult things that people can't buy'
Link : https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2019/jun/08/cindy-sherman-interview-exhibition-national-portrait-gallery

Title : The 'Real' Cindy Sherman
Link : https://artreview.com/the-real-cindy-sherman/

Title : The Cindy Sherman Effect
Link : https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/the-cindy-sherman-effect-505/

Title : 'Pictures By Women': A Too-Ambitious Exhibition?
Link : http://www.npr.org/blogs/pictureshow/2010/05/06/126558175/exhibitions

Title : Under the Gaze: The Art of Cindy Sherman (HENI Talks)
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ED6QhmRchZI

Title : Cindy Sherman: Characters | Art21 "Extended Play"
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tiszC33puc0

Title : The Museum of Modern Art: How Mass Media Representations Shape Us | Cindy Sherman
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=239_BLVToB8

Title : The Art Channel: Cindy Sherman at the National Portrait Gallery
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9Vh28sqXmQ

Title : Interview Magazine - Cindy Sherman
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mZekNrhRWek

Title : The Museum of Modern Art: How to see Cindy Sherman - with Eva Respini
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bsFsibTO3L4

Title : Smarthistory: Sherman, Untitled Film Still #21
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fPwsLeH8fA

Title : Queensland Art Gallery and Gallery of Modern Art
Link : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Om8MLNeID6E

